Ff150 `<img>` attribute `sizes` takes value `auto` (#43684)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/htmlimageelement/sizes/index.md

{{APIRef("HTML DOM")}}

The **`sizes`** property of the {{domxref("HTMLImageElement")}} interface allows you to specify the layout width of the [image](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img) for each of a list of [media queries](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Media_queries), or `auto` for lazy-loaded images to allow the browser to automatically select an image to display based on the layout size of the element.

> This provides the ability to automatically select among different images specified in the element {{domxref("HTMLImageElement/srcset","srcset")}} — even images of different orientations or aspect ratios — as the document state changes to match different media conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows the browser to choose between different images specified in the element {{domxref("HTMLImageElement/srcset", "srcset")}} — even images with different orientations or aspect ratios — as the document state changes to match different media conditions.
```

Author: Thanks, slight modification because this wasn't quite correct (originally). The way it read the selection adjusts as the document changes _state_ for media conditions.
In fact this is what happens for FF and partially for chrome, but it is not required by the spec. That basically says you evaluate the selection based on the media query at the point the image is loaded. It doesn't require that the load is revaluated as the media conditions change.  I don't clarify the detail but this makes the requirement more clear.

```suggestion
This allows the browser to choose between different images specified in the element {{domxref("HTMLImageElement/srcset", "srcset")}} to match different media conditions — even images with different orientations or aspect ratios.
```

> It reflects the `<img>` element's [`sizes`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img#sizes) content attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sizes` property reflects the `<img>` element's [`sizes`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img#sizes) content attribute.
```

Felt a bit weird to have two sentences in a row beginning with "It..."

It can only be present when `srcset` uses width descriptors.

## Value

> A string containing one or more comma-separated values, which can be the `auto` keyword and/or any number of _source sizes_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A string containing one or more comma-separated values, each of which can be the `auto` keyword and/or a _source size_.
```

Author: No, it can be just auto, or start with auto and have any number of source sizse, or be any number of source sizes and not the auto keyword. You can only specify auto at the start an only once 

```suggestion
A string containing that is can be the `auto` keyword (optionally followed by any number of _source sizes_), or one or more _source sizes_.
```

{{APIRef("HTML DOM")}}

The **`sizes`** property of the {{domxref("HTMLImageElement")}} interface allows you to specify the layout width of the [image](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img) for each of a list of [media queries](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Media_queries), or `auto` for lazy-loaded images to allow the browser to automatically select an image to display based on the layout size of the element.
This allows the browser to choose between different images specified in the element {{domxref("HTMLImageElement/srcset", "srcset")}} to match different media conditions — even images with different orientations or aspect ratios.

The `sizes` property reflects the `<img>` element's [`sizes`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img#sizes) content attribute.
It can only be present when `srcset` uses width descriptors.

## Value

> A string containing that is can be the `auto` keyword (optionally followed by any number of _source sizes_), or one or more _source sizes_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A string containing that can be the `auto` keyword (optionally followed by any number of _source sizes_), or one or more _source sizes_.
```

Author: ```suggestion
A string that can be the `auto` keyword (optionally followed by any number of _source sizes_), or one or more _source sizes_.
```

See the [`sizes`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img#sizes) attribute in the HTML `<img>` reference for more information.

## Examples

### Selecting an image to fit window width

This example demonstrates how the browser uses the `sizes` attribute to select an image from `srcset` based on the rendered width of the image at the current viewport width.
It also allows you to see the effect of resizing the browser window on which image is loaded.

#### HTML

In order to demonstrate the effect of lazy loading the images need to be initially hidden from the {{glossary("visual viewport")}}, and then scrolled into view.
This is achieved by having an outer `scroll-container` {{htmlelement("div")}} that nests `spacer` and `demo-wrap` containers.
The image is contained inside the `demo-wrap` container, which is pushed out of the visual viewport by the height set on the `spacer` container.

The {{htmlelement("img")}} element has the following attributes:

> - `srcset` defines four images and indicates that they are 600px, 900px, 1200px, and 1500px wide.

Reviewer: code font for the values?

Author: ```suggestion
- `srcset` defines four images and indicates that they are `600px`, `900px`, `1200px`, and `1500px` wide.
```

  document.getElementById("resizable"),
);

images.forEach((img) => {
  if (img.complete) {
    log(`Already cached: ${img.currentSrc} (${img.offsetWidth}px)`);
  }
  img.addEventListener("load", () => {
    log(`Loaded: ${img.currentSrc} (${img.offsetWidth}px container)`);
  });
});

const observer = new IntersectionObserver(
  (entries) => {
    entries.forEach((entry) => {
      if (entry.isIntersecting) {
        const img = entry.target;
        log(`Entered viewport: ${img.alt}`);
        observer.unobserve(img);
      }
    });
  },
  {
    root: document.getElementById("scroll-container"),
    rootMargin: "0px",
    threshold: 0.1,
  },
);

images.forEach((img) => observer.observe(img));
```

The CSS and JavaScript are not shown (if you want to examine these, select "Play" to view the whole example in the interactive playground).

#### Result

The example is best {{LiveSampleLink('Selecting an image to fit window width', 'viewed in its own window')}}, so you can adjust the sizes fully, and the example is not constrained by its containing frame.

1. Scroll the frame to display the image.
   The label at the bottom of the image shows the current container width.

> 2. Resize the window — you should see the image change at the `sizes` attribute's media query trigger points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Resize the window — you should see the image change at the `sizes` attribute's media query break points.
```

For consistency?

Or am I wrong?

Author: No, I think that is the normal terminology. Getting old :-)

   Note that the the selected image may be larger than the container width alone suggests.
   Many displays, if not most, have a [device pixel ratio (DPR)](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/devicePixelRatio) greater than one.
   In order to render a sharp image at the physical pixel density of the display, a browser will multiply the matched `sizes` hint by the DPR before selecting from `srcset`.
   For example, on a 2× display with a viewport of ~500px, the matched hint is `600px`, but the browser looks for a ~1200px image and selects `1200.png` as the closest available size and then scales it to fit in the available space.

   > [!NOTE]

>    > As a result, some of the images in the `srcset` may not be reachable on a particular display at some trigger points, and this may be browser dependent.

Author: ```suggestion
   > As a result, some of the images in the `srcset` may not be reachable on a particular display at some break points, and this may be browser dependent.
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("Selecting an image to fit window width", "", 600)}}

The log provides information when a `load` event fires for the image, and when it intersects the visible viewport.
Note that the image is lazy-loaded, so the `load` event should be fired just before the image enters the viewport.

### Automatic image selection for lazy loaded images

This example demonstrates how setting the `sizes` value to `auto` affects the selection of the image to load from the [`srcset`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img#srcset) when {{htmlelement("img")}} elements are lazy-loaded.
It also allows you to see the effect of changing the size of a container on the loaded image.

#### HTML

> In order to demonstrate the effect of lazy loading the images need to be initially hidden from the {{glossary("visual viewport")}}, and then scrolled into view.

Reviewer: Given that this example is very similar to the previous one, you can probably cut down on some of this explanation, and just say that it is similar to the previous example, blah blah.

Author: Not certain if it was worth it, but done in https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/43684/changes#r3076728088 :-)

This is achieved by having an outer `scroll-container` {{htmlelement("div")}} that nests `spacer` and `demo-wrap` containers.
The images are contained inside the `demo-wrap` container, which is pushed out of the visual viewport by the height set on the `spacer` container.

The three {{htmlelement("img")}} elements have different `alt` attribute values, but are otherwise identical:

- `srcset` defines three images and indicates that they are 600px, 400px, and 200px wide.
- `src` specifies the image that will be used if `srcset` is not supported or it can't be parsed.
  This is the largest image in the `srcset` as the visual result from downscaling it for smaller layout sizes will almost always be better than upscaling the smallest image for larger layout sizes.
- `loading` is `lazy`.
- `sizes` is `auto`.
  This tells the browser to select the image that is most appropriate based on the layout information it has at the time the image intersects with the visual viewport.

> The three images are constrained within containers that are sized to select different images.

Author: ```suggestion
The HTML is similar to that in the previous example, except that it defines three near-identical {{htmlelement("img")}} elements, each with a `scrset` indicating 3 images that are `600px`, `400px`, and `200px` wide, and with a `sizes` value of `auto`.
These are constrained within containers that are sized to select the different images.
```

#### Result

> The page is best {{LiveSampleLink('Selecting an image to fit window width', 'viewed in its own window')}}, so you can adjust the sizes fully (otherwise it is constrained by its containing frame).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The page is best {{LiveSampleLink('Selecting an image to fit window width', 'viewed in its own window')}}, so you can adjust the sizes fully, and the example is not constrained by its containing frame.
```

> 1. Enable the developer tools and change the width of the page — you should see the image change size at the sizes media query trigger points: 480px (30em), and 800px (50em).

Reviewer: All the length values should be put in code font.

Reviewer: Also, I've got a couple of issues with this explanation:

1. You don't mention that the image itself changes, as well as the size. This is covered in the example HTML section, but it would be helpful to clarify it here.
2. You don't get to see how the width changes at 480px wide, as the width only goes down to 500px. At least, this was my experience on Mac, on both Firefox and Chrome. Maybe worth experimenting with using a different trigger point that is more likely to be seen on desktop computers?

Reviewer 2: I actually have an issue with the example itself. It uses `em` units, which depend on the font size chosen by the user. So 30em are only 480px in the default case of 16px = 1em.

The concept behind the `sizes` attribute is already complicated enough.
Therefore, I'd rather replace the current example by a simpler (contrived) one that

* uses pixels instead of `em`s.
* uses only two instead of three size options.
* uses different images for the size options (like you did for the `auto` value).
* works for a huge range of devices by choosing the size option ranges wisely.

Or maybe instead of completely replacing the example, it should be moved to the end and the simpler one described here be added as the first one.

Author: @chrisdavidmills Thanks! Fixed up as you suggested. I moved this example to the end.

@SebastianZ Thanks, I have created a new "first" example which uses sizes media queries. Please check it out. 

I found this hard because the behaviour depends on your particular hardware - on my computer you end up with a double-size image being selected to what you might expect because it has a DPR of 2 (on FF). Chrome behaves differently again, as it seems to detect a DPR of 1.5.
I have explained this briefly, but it means you end up with more images that you would expect in the srcset and media query triggers that select different images on different browsers. Not good for examples.

Anyhow, see what you think.

2. Set the width between 50em (800px) and 60em (960px) so that the last media query is selected. Then alternately press each of the buttons and note how the layout size of the image is changed.

{{EmbedLiveSample("Selecting an image to fit window width", "", 1050)}}

### Automatic image selection for lazy loaded images

> This example demonstrates how setting the `sizes` value to `auto` affects selection of the image to load from the [`srcset`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img#srcset) of lazy-loaded {{htmlelement("img")}} elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example demonstrates how setting the `sizes` value to `auto` affects the selection of the image to load from the [`srcset`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/img#srcset) when {{htmlelement("img")}} elements are lazy-loaded.
```

It also allows you to see the effect of changing the size of a container on the loaded image.

#### HTML

> In order to demonstrate the effect of lazy loading the images need to be initially hidden from the visual viewport, and then scrolled into view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to demonstrate the effect of lazy loading the images need to be initially hidden from the {{glossary("visual viewport")}}, and then scrolled into view.
```

This is achieved by having an outer `scroll-container` {{htmlelement("div")}} that nests `spacer` and `demo-wrap` containers.

> The images are nested within containers inside the `demo-wrap`, which is pushed out of the visual viewport by the `spacer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The images are contained inside the `demo-wrap` container, which is pushed out of the visual viewport by the height set on the `spacer` container.
```

> The three {{htmlelement("img")}} elements have different `alt` properties, but are otherwise identical:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The three {{htmlelement("img")}} elements have different `alt` attribute values, but are otherwise identical:
```

- `srcset` defines three images and indicates that they are 600px, 400px, and 200px wide.
- `src` specifies the image that will be used if `srcset` is not supported or it can't be parsed.

>   We use the largest image in the `srcset` as this will almost always downscale better than the smallest image will upscale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This is the largest image in the `srcset` as it will almost always downscale better than the smallest image will upscale.
```

Reviewer 2: It might be unclear what is meant by "downscale better", so I'd rather suggest

```suggestion
  This is the largest image in the `srcset` as the visual result from downscaling it for smaller layout sizes will almost always be better than upscaling the smallest image for larger layout sizes.
```

          alt="Image in medium container" />
      </div>
      <div class="label"><strong>Container width: 200px</strong></div>
    </div>

    <div class="img-container img-container--lg">
      <div class="img-square">
        <img
          loading="lazy"
          sizes="auto"
          src="600.png"
          srcset="600.png 600w, 400.png 400w, 200.png 200w"
          alt="Image in large container" />
      </div>
      <div class="label"><strong>Container width: 400px</strong></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
```

```html hidden
<div id="controls">
  <label for="slider">First image width:</label>
  <input type="range" id="slider" min="100" max="700" value="100" step="1" />
  <input type="number" id="number" min="100" max="700" value="100" step="1" />
  <span>px</span>
</div>
```

```html hidden
<pre id="log"></pre>
```

```js hidden
const logElement = document.querySelector("#log");
function log(text) {
  logElement.innerText = `${logElement.innerText}${text}\n`;
  logElement.scrollTop = logElement.scrollHeight;
}
```

```css hidden
#log {
  height: 100px;
  overflow: scroll;
  padding: 0.5rem;
  border: 1px solid black;
}
```

#### CSS

> Here we show the size of CSS that sets the size of the image containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we show the CSS classes that set the size of the different image containers.
```

function setSize(px) {
  px = Math.min(700, Math.max(100, px));
  resizable.style.width = px + "px";
  resizableImg.sizes = px + "px"; // update sizes so browser can pick new srcset candidate
  resizableLabel.textContent = px + "px";
  slider.value = px;
  number.value = px;
}

slider.addEventListener("input", () => setSize(parseInt(slider.value)));
number.addEventListener("input", () => setSize(parseInt(number.value)));

// Logging
const images = document.querySelectorAll(".img-square img");

images.forEach((img) => {
  if (img.complete) {
    log(`Already cached: ${img.currentSrc} (${img.offsetWidth}px)`);
  }
  img.addEventListener("load", () => {
    log(`Loaded: ${img.currentSrc} (${img.offsetWidth}px container)`);
  });
});

const observer = new IntersectionObserver(
  (entries) => {
    entries.forEach((entry) => {
      if (entry.isIntersecting) {
        const img = entry.target;
        log(`Entered viewport: ${img.alt}`);
        observer.unobserve(img);
      }
    });
  },
  {
    root: document.getElementById("scroll-container"),
    rootMargin: "0px",
    threshold: 0.1,
  },
);

images.forEach((img) => observer.observe(img));
```

> The remaining CSS and the code for the slider, logging, and so on are not shown (if you are interested select "Play" to view the whole example in the interactive playground).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining CSS and the JavaScript that powers the slider, logging, and so on, are not shown (if you are interested in examining these, select "Play" to view the whole example in the interactive playground).
```

#### Result

Scroll the frame to display the three images.

> The browser should have selected a different image for each based on the constrained layout size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The browser should have selected a different image for each based on the different width constraints.
```

You can use the slider to modify the size of the container for the first image.

> Note that the browser may or may not select a new image to display as the size of the container changes.

Reviewer: Is this due to browser implementation differences, or something else?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it's obviously up to the browsers when to run the algorithm, as [Hamish pointed out in the related Bugzilla bug](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1819581#c18), see https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/images.html#reacting-to-environment-changes. (Though the spec also states: "User agents are encouraged to run this algorithm in particular when the user changes the viewport's size".)

@hamishwillee Maybe the sentence should clarify that circumstance.

```suggestion
Note that the browser may or may not select a new image to display as the size of the container changes as implementations are not required to react to dynamic changes.
```

> {{EmbedLiveSample("Automatic image selection for lazy loaded images", "", 600)}}

Reviewer: I'm assuming this demo works. The images aren't loading on the preview link, which is a bit frustrating.

Author: It does!

The log provides information when a `load` event fires for each image, and when an image intersects the visible viewport.

> Note that the images are lazy loaded, so the load event should be fired just before the image enters the viewport.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the images are lazy-loaded, so the `load` event should be fired just before the image enters the viewport.
```

> Also note that the event fires as you modify the container size for the first image, indicating when the browser has recalculated the layout (not necessarily that a new image has been loaded).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also note that the `load` event also fires as you modify the container size for the first image, indicating when the browser has recalculated the layout (not necessarily that a new image has been loaded).
```

#### Result

The page is best {{LiveSampleLink('Blog example', 'viewed in its own window')}}, so you can adjust the sizes fully, and the example is not constrained by its containing frame.

> 1. Enable the developer tools and change the width of the page — you should see the image change (and jump in size) at the sizes media query trigger points: `640px` (`40em`), and `800px` (`50em`).

Author: ```suggestion
1. Enable the developer tools and change the width of the page — you should see the image change (and jump in size) at the sizes media query break points: `640px` (`40em`), and `800px` (`50em`).
```
